Recipe: File-based symbol import/export (#239)
eclipse-langium/langium-website: hugo/content/docs/recipes/scoping/file-based.md

        }
        return EMPTY_SCOPE;
    }
    //...
}
```

Do not forget to add the new service to the `HelloWorldModule`:

```typescript
export const HelloWorldModule: Module<HelloWorldServices, PartialLangiumServices & HelloWorldAddedServices> = {
    //...
    references: {
        ScopeComputation: (services) => new HelloWorldScopeComputation(services),
        ScopeProvider: (services) => new HelloWorldScopeProvider(services) //NEW!
    }
};
```

You noticed the two missing functions? Here is what they have to do.

The first function (`getExportedPersonsFromGlobalScope(context)`) will take a look at the global scope and return all exported persons respecting the files that were touched by the file imports. Note that we are outputting all persons that are marked with the `export` keyword. The actual name resolution is done internally later by the linker.

```typescript
protected getExportedPersonsFromGlobalScope(context: ReferenceInfo): Scope {
    //get document for current reference
    const document = AstUtils.getDocument(context.container);
    //get model of document
    const model = document.parseResult.value as Model;
    //determine current directory

>     const currentDir = dirname(document.uri.fsPath);
>     //look at all imports of the current document
>     const astNodeDescriptions = model.fileImports.flatMap((fileImport) => {
>         const fileName = resolve(currentDir, fileImport.file);
>         const uri = URI.file(fileName);
>         return this.indexManager.allElements(Person, new Set<string>([uri.toString()])).toArray();
>     });

Reviewer: Suggestion: We can do this using a single `indexManager#allElements` call. Also using `file` here makes this unavailable for non-file scheme URIs

```suggestion
    const currentUri = document.uri;
    const currentDir = dirname(currentUri.path);
    const uris = new Set<string>();
    for (const fileImport of model.fileImports) {
      const filePath = join(currentDir, fileImport.file);
      const uri = currentUri.with({ path: filePath });
      uris.add(uri.toString());
    }
    const astNodeDescriptions = this.indexManager.allElements(Person, uris).toArray();
```

Author: Added also comments

---
title: "File-based scoping"
weight: 300
---

## Goal

Our goal here is to mimic the TypeScript import/export mechanism. By that I mean:

* you can export certain symbols using an `export` keyword from your current file to make it available to the other files
* you can import certain symbols using the `import` keyword from a different file

To make things easier I will modify the "Hello World" example from the [learning section](/docs/learn/workflow).

## Step 1: Change the grammar

> First thing, we are changing the grammar to support the `export` and the `import` keywords. Here is the modified grammar:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First off, we are changing the grammar to support the `export` and the `import` statements. Let's take a look at the modified grammar:
```

```langium
grammar HelloWorld

entry Model:
    (
        fileImports+=FileImport  //NEW: imports per file
        | persons+=Person
        | greetings+=Greeting
    )*;

> FileImport:
>     'import' '{' personImports+=PersonImport (',' personImports+=PersonImport)* '}' 'from' file=STRING
>     ; //NEW: imports of the same file are gathered in a list

Reviewer: Minor: Formatting

```suggestion
FileImport: //NEW: imports of the same file are gathered in a list
    'import' '{' 
        personImports+=PersonImport (',' personImports+=PersonImport)* 
    '}' 'from' file=STRING; 
```

> PersonImport:
>     person=[Person:ID] ('as' name=ID)?
>     ;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PersonImport:
    person=[Person:ID] ('as' name=ID)?;
```

Person:
    published?='export'? 'person' name=ID; //NEW: export keyword

type Greetable = PersonImport | Person

Greeting:
    'Hello' person=[Greetable:ID] '!';

hidden terminal WS: /\s+/;
terminal ID: /[_a-zA-Z][\w_]*/;
terminal STRING: /"(\\.|[^"\\])*"|'(\\.|[^'\\])*'/;

hidden terminal ML_COMMENT: /\/\*[\s\S]*?\*\//;
hidden terminal SL_COMMENT: /\/\/[^\n\r]*/;
```

After changing the grammar you need to regenerate the abstract syntax tree (AST) and the language infrastructure. You can do that by running the following command:

```bash
npm run langium:generate
```

## Step 2: Exporting persons to the global scope

The index manager shall get all persons that are marked with the export keyword. In Langium this is done by overriding the `ScopeComputation.getExports(…)` function. Here is the implementation:

```typescript
export class HelloWorldScopeComputation extends DefaultScopeComputation {

>     override async computeExports(document: LangiumDocument<AstNode>, _cancelToken?: CancellationToken | undefined): Promise<AstNodeDescription[]> {
>         const model = document.parseResult.value as Model;
>         return model.persons
>             .filter(p => p.published)
>             .map(p => this.descriptions.createDescription(p, p.name))
>         ;
>     }

Reviewer: Minor:
```suggestion
    override async computeExports(document: LangiumDocument<AstNode>): Promise<AstNodeDescription[]> {
        const model = document.parseResult.value as Model;
        return model.persons
            .filter(p => p.published)
            .map(p => this.descriptions.createDescription(p, p.name));
    }
```

}
```

After that, you need to register the `HelloWorldScopeComputation` in the `HelloWorldModule`:

```typescript
export const HelloWorldModule: Module<HelloWorldServices, PartialLangiumServices & HelloWorldAddedServices> = {
    //...
    references: {
        ScopeComputation: (services) => new HelloWorldScopeComputation(services)
    }
};
```

Having done this, will make all persons that are marked with the `export` keyword available to the other files through the index manager.

> ## Step 3: Bending the cross-reference resolution

Reviewer: Suggestion: That's a pretty generic title
```suggestion
## Step 3: Importing from specific files
```

> The final step is to adjust the cross-reference resolution through overriding the `DefaultScopeProvider.getScope(…)` function. Here is the implementation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The final step is to adjust the cross-reference resolution by overriding the `DefaultScopeProvider.getScope(…)` function:
```

                }
                break;
            case 'Greeting':
                if(context.property === 'person') {
                    return this.getImportedPersonsFromCurrentFile(context);
                }
                break;
        }
        return EMPTY_SCOPE;
    }
    //...
}
```

Do not forget to add the new service to the `HelloWorldModule`:

```typescript
export const HelloWorldModule: Module<HelloWorldServices, PartialLangiumServices & HelloWorldAddedServices> = {
    //...
    references: {
        ScopeComputation: (services) => new HelloWorldScopeComputation(services),
        ScopeProvider: (services) => new HelloWorldScopeProvider(services) //NEW!
    }
};
```

You noticed the two missing functions? Here is what they have to do.

The first function (`getExportedPersonsFromGlobalScope(context)`) will take a look at the global scope and return all exported persons respecting the files that were touched by the file imports. Note that we are outputting all persons that are marked with the `export` keyword. The actual name resolution is done internally later by the linker.

```typescript

> protected getExportedPersonsFromGlobalScope(context: ReferenceInfo): Scope {

Reviewer: Minor:
```suggestion
private getExportedPersonsFromGlobalScope(context: ReferenceInfo): Scope {
```
